Add documentation for standalone (sparkless) GC (#8307)
treeverse/lakeFS: docs/howto/garbage-collection/standalone-gc.md

---
title: Standalone Garbage Collection
description: Run a limited version of garbage collection without any external dependencies
parent: Garbage Collection
nav_order: 5
grand_parent: How-To
redirect_from:
  - /cloud/standalone-gc.html
---

# Standalone Garbage Collection
{: .d-inline-block }
lakeFS Enterprise
{: .label .label-green }

{: .d-inline-block }
experimental
{: .label .label-red }

{: .note }
> Standalone GC is only available for [lakeFS Enterprise]({% link enterprise/index.md %}).

{: .note .warning }

> > Standalone GC is experimental and offers limited capabilities compared to the [Spark-backed GC]({% link howto/garbage-collection/gc.md %}). Read through the [limitations](./standalone-gc.md#limitations) carefully and use at your own risk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Standalone GC is experimental and offers limited capabilities compared to the [Spark-backed GC]({% link howto/garbage-collection/gc.md %}). Read through the [limitations](./standalone-gc.md#limitations) carefully before using it.
```

"at your own risk" sounds a bit harsh and unreliable

> ## About

Reviewer: nit; add a whitespace after every markdown heading

Standalone GC is a limited version of the Spark-backed GC that runs without any external dependencies, as a standalone docker image.

## Limitations

> 1. Tested in-lab under the following conditions: <TODO: publish acceptance and performance test results once ready>.

Reviewer: This section is going to include the scale in which sgc was tested at?

Author: Added concrete numbers (left the TODO because I'm waiting to run it on the final version, which is not ready yet).

2. Horizontal scale is not supported - Only a single instance of `lakefs-sgc` can operate at a time on a given repository.

> 

Reviewer: We should add a limitation that says that sgc only implements the mark stage without sweeping, and sweep requires user action

Author: Done - added a bullet to "Limitations", and a new "Output" section describing this.

## Installation

> ### 1. Obtain Dockerhub token

Reviewer: nit; I prefer using words rather than bulleted lists in markdown headers but its up to you 
```suggestion
### Step 1: Obtain Dockerhub token
```

Author: Done

As an enterprise customer, you should already have a dockerhub token for the `externallakefs` user.
If not, contact us at ___ (TODO: add mail/whaterver).

> ### 2. Login to docker with this token

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2. Login to dockerhub with this token
```

Author: Done

```bash
docker login -u <your token>
```

### 3. Download the docker image
Download the image from the [lakefs-sgc](https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/treeverse/lakefs-sgc/general) repository:
```bash
docker pull treeverse/lakefs-sgc:tagname
```

> ## Usage

Reviewer: Can you please add these two steps here:
3. running the job with example params 
4. Finding the output and guidance for how to read it and a CTA to delete the objects manually

Author: > running the job with example params

I already added an example - take a look at "Example - docker run command"

> How to find the output and guidance for how to read it and a CTA to delete the objects manually

Done - in the new "Output" section. Not sure WDYM by a "CTA", I just added a sentence explaining that the user should read the report and delete manually.

Author: > Done - in the new "Output" section. Not sure WDYM by a "CTA", I just added a sentence explaining that the user should read the report and delete manually.

Update: I added a dedicated section for "Deleting marked objects" with the same sentence ^

### AWS Credentials
Currently, `lakefs-sgc` does not provide an option to explicitly set AWS credentials. It relies on the hosting machine
to be set up correctly, and reads the AWS credentials from the machine.

> This means, you should set up your machine however AWS expects you to set it. \

Reviewer: How configurations work for on-prem users who use Minio? Riksbank are using Minio

> This means, you should set up your machine however AWS expects you to set it. \

Reviewer: How configurations work for on-prem users who use Minio?

Author: This is a great and important question - I wasn't aware that Riskbank's setup is Minio, and it's not mentioned in either.
I'll need to get back to you about this one.

cc @itaiad200 @Isan-Rivkin @Jonathan-Rosenberg FYI.

Author: Done - added "S3-compatible clients" section and example (cc @itaiad200)

| `objects_min_age`          | Tells the GC Ignore any object that is last modified within this time frame ("cutoff time")        | "6h"                           | duration                                                |
| `lakefs.endpoint_url`      | The URL to the lakeFS installation - should end with `/api/v1`                                     | NOT SET                        | URL                                                     |
| `lakefs.access_key_id`     | Access key to the lakeFS installation                                                              | NOT SET                        | string                                                  |
| `lakefs.secret_access_key` | Secret access key to the lakeFS installation                                                       | NOT SET                        | string                                                  |

These keys can be provided in the following ways:
1. Config file: Create a YAML file with the keys, each `.` is a new nesting level. \
   For example, `logging.level` will be:
   ```yaml
   logging:
     level: <value> # info,debug...
   ```

>    Then, pass it to the program using the `--config path/to/config.yaml` argument.

Reviewer: There isn't a default location it expects for? that's ok, just to clarify

Author: There is, it's mentioned in the "Command line reference" section:
> #### Flags:
> - `-c, --config`: config file to use (default is $HOME/.lakefs-sgc.yaml)

{% include toc_2-3.html %}

## About

Standalone GC is a limited version of the Spark-backed GC that runs without any external dependencies, as a standalone docker image.

## Limitations

1. Except for the [Lab tests](./standalone-gc.md#lab-tests) performed, there are no further guarantees about the performance profile of the Standalone GC. 
2. Horizontal scale is not supported - Only a single instance of `lakefs-sgc` can operate at a time on a given repository.
3. It only marks objects and does not delete them - Equivalent to the GC's [mark only mode]({% link howto/garbage-collection/gc.md %}#mark-only-mode). \
   More about that in the [Output](./standalone-gc.md#output) section.

### Lab tests

<TODO: update with final results once ready>

Repository spec:

- 100k objects
- < 200 commits
- 1 branch

Machine spec:
- 4GiB RAM
- 8 CPUs

In this setup, we measured:

- Time: ~1 minute
- Disk space: 120MiB

## Installation

### Step 1: Obtain Dockerhub token
As an enterprise customer, you should already have a dockerhub token for the `externallakefs` user.

> If not, contact us at ___ (TODO: add mail/whaterver).

Author: @talSofer what should I put here?

Reviewer 2: support@treeverse.io

Author: Done

### Step 2: Login to Dockerhub with this token
```bash
docker login -u <your token>
```

### Step 3: Download the docker image
Download the image from the [lakefs-sgc](https://hub.docker.com/repository/docker/treeverse/lakefs-sgc/general) repository:
```bash

> docker pull treeverse/lakefs-sgc:tagname

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
docker pull treeverse/lakefs-sgc:<tag>
```

Author: Done

|----------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| `logging.format`           | Logs output format                                                                                 | "text"                         | "text","json"                                           |
| `logging.level`            | Logs level                                                                                         | "info"                         | "error","warn",info","debug","trace"                    |
| `logging.output`           | Where to output the logs to                                                                        | "-"                            | "-" (stdout), "=" (stderr), or any string for file path |
| `logging.file_max_size_mb` | Max file size for logs output (relevant only if `logging.output` is set to a file path)            | 102400 (100MiB)                | number                                                  |

> | `logging.files_keep`       | Number of files to keep for logs rotation (relevant only if `logging.output` is set to a file path | 100                            | number                                                  |

Reviewer 2: I would remove these 2 options. More is less, we're not expecting significant amount of logs from this GC, we can always add these later

Author: Done

| `cache_dir`                | Directory to use for caching data during run                                                       | ~/.lakefs-sgc/data             | string                                                  |

> | `aws.max_page_size`        | Max number of items per page when listing objects in AWS                                           | not set (AWS defaults to 1000) | number                                                  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `aws.max_page_size`        | Max number of items per page when listing objects in AWS                                           | 1000 | number                                                  |
```

Author: Done

> | `objects_min_age`          | Ignore any object that is last modified within this time frame ("cutoff time")                     | "6h"                           | duration                                                |

Reviewer 2: Add a warning that it could be dangerous to change this value to something shorter. It's hardcoded in the server and making less than 6h could cause ongoing writes to fail.

Author: Done

| `lakefs.secret_access_key` | Secret access key to the lakeFS installation                                                       | NOT SET                        | string                                                  |

These keys can be provided in the following ways:
1. Config file: Create a YAML file with the keys, each `.` is a new nesting level. \
   For example, `logging.level` will be:
   ```yaml
   logging:
     level: <value> # info,debug...
   ```
   Then, pass it to the program using the `--config path/to/config.yaml` argument.
2. Environment variables: by setting `LAKEFS_SGC_<KEY>`, with uppercase letters and `.`s converted to `_`s. \
   For example `logging.level` will be:
   ```bash
   export LAKEFS_SGC_LOGGING_LEVEL=info`
   ```

Example (minimalistic) config file:
```yaml
logging:
  level: debug
lakefs:
  endpoint_url: https://your.url/api/v1
  access_key_id: <your lakeFS access key>
  secret_access_key: <your lakeFS secret key>
```

### Command line reference

#### Flags:
- `-c, --config`: config file to use (default is $HOME/.lakefs-sgc.yaml)

#### Commands:
**run**

Usage: \
`lakefs-sgc run <repository>`

Flags:

> - `--cache-dir`: directory to cache read files and metadataDir (default is $HOME/.lakefs-sgc/data/)

Reviewer 2: Isn't this a config value? How can it be both?

Author: It can :slightly_smiling_face: 
Using Viper, we bind this config key (from env/file) to a run argument as well

### Example - docker run command
Here's an example for running the `treeverse/lakefs-sgc` docker image, with AWS credentials parsed from the `~/.aws/credentials` file:

```bash
docker run \
-e AWS_REGION=<region> \
-e AWS_SESSION_TOKEN="$(grep 'aws_session_token' ~/.aws/credentials | awk -F' = ' '{print $2}')" \
-e AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID="$(grep 'aws_access_key_id' ~/.aws/credentials | awk -F' = ' '{print $2}')" \
-e AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY="$(grep 'aws_secret_access_key' ~/.aws/credentials | awk -F' = ' '{print $2}')" \
-e LAKEFS_SGC_LAKEFS_ENDPOINT_URL=<your lakefs URL> \
-e LAKEFS_SGC_LAKEFS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<your accesss key> \
-e LAKEFS_SGC_LAKEFS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<your secret key> \
-e LAKEFS_SGC_LOGGING_LEVEL=debug \
treeverse/lakefs-sgc:<version> run <repository>
```

### Output
`lakefs-sgc` will write its reports to `<REPOSITORY_STORAGE_NAMESPACE>/_lakefs/retention/gc/reports/<RUN_ID>/`. \
_RUN_ID_ is generated during runtime by the Standalone GC. You can find it in the logs:
```
"Marking objects for deletion" ... run_id=gcoca17haabs73f2gtq0
```

In this prefix, you'll find 3 objects:
- `deleted.json` - Containing all marked objects in a json format. 

> - `deleted.parquet` - Containing all marked objects in a parquet format, with the following schema:

Reviewer 2: Why do we need this?

Author: Removed - the report is now only a `deleted.csv` file (and a summary file)

   ```
  ┌─────────────┬─────────────┬─────────┬─────────┬─────────┬─────────┐
  │ column_name │ column_type │  null   │   key   │ default │  extra  │
  │   varchar   │   varchar   │ varchar │ varchar │ varchar │ varchar │
  ├─────────────┼─────────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┼─────────┤
  │ address     │ VARCHAR     │ YES     │         │         │         │
  └─────────────┴─────────────┴─────────┴─────────┴─────────┴─────────┘
  ```
- `summary.json` - A small json summarizing the GC run. Example:
```json
{
    "run_id": "gcoca17haabs73f2gtq0",
    "success": true,
    "first_slice": "gcss5tpsrurs73cqi6e0",
    "start_time": "2024-10-27T13:19:26.890099059Z",
    "cutoff_time": "2024-10-27T07:19:26.890099059Z",
    "num_deleted_objects": 33000
}
```

### Deleting marked objects

> To delete the objects marked by the GC, you'll need to read the `deleted.parquet` or `deleted.json` files, and manually delete each address from AWS.

Reviewer 2: Please provide a bash command/script to:
1. Parse the deleted objects and delete them
2. Move them to somewhere else in the storage namespace (i.e. safe delete) and a way to restore them if needed.

Author: Done - added an example for parsing the addresses and moving them to another bucket, the leap from here to `aws s3 rm` is trivial.

description: Run a limited version of garbage collection without any external dependencies
parent: Garbage Collection
nav_order: 5
grand_parent: How-To
redirect_from:
  - /cloud/standalone-gc.html
---

# Standalone Garbage Collection
{: .d-inline-block }
lakeFS Enterprise
{: .label .label-green }

{: .d-inline-block }
experimental
{: .label .label-red }

{: .note }
> Standalone GC is only available for [lakeFS Enterprise]({% link enterprise/index.md %}).

{: .note .warning }
> Standalone GC is experimental and offers limited capabilities compared to the [Spark-backed GC]({% link howto/garbage-collection/gc.md %}). Read through the [limitations](./standalone-gc.md#limitations) carefully before using it.

{% include toc_2-4.html %}

## About

Standalone GC is a limited version of the Spark-backed GC that runs without any external dependencies, as a standalone docker image.

## Limitations

1. Except for the [Lab tests](./standalone-gc.md#lab-tests) performed, there are no further guarantees about the performance profile of the Standalone GC. 
2. Horizontal scale is not supported - Only a single instance of `lakefs-sgc` can operate at a time on a given repository.

> 3. It only marks objects and does not delete them - Equivalent to the GC's [mark only mode]({% link howto/garbage-collection/gc.md %}#mark-only-mode). \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Stand-alone GC only marks objects and does not delete them - Equivalent to the GC's [mark only mode]({% link howto/garbage-collection/gc.md %}#mark-only-mode). \
```

Author: Done

| `logging.output`               | Where to output the logs to                                                                                                                                   | "-"                | "-" (stdout), "=" (stderr), or any string for file path |
| `cache_dir`                    | Directory to use for caching data during run                                                                                                                  | ~/.lakefs-sgc/data | string                                                  |
| `aws.max_page_size`            | Max number of items per page when listing objects in AWS                                                                                                      | 1000               | number                                                  |
| `aws.s3.addressing_path_style` | Whether or not to use [path-style](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/userguide/VirtualHosting.html#path-style-access) when reading objects from AWS | true               | boolean                                                 |

> | `objects_min_age`*             | Ignore any object that is last modified within this time frame ("cutoff time")                                                                                | "6h"               | duration                                                |

Reviewer: Why do we need this if we have retention policy? and if it is risky to change it, why it is configurable?

Author: Removed.

It's on top of the retention policy, this configuration exists in the GC as well.
But maybe it's worth not documenting it, to prevent mishaps...

1. Config file: Create a YAML file with the keys, each `.` is a new nesting level. \
   For example, `logging.level` will be:
   ```yaml
   logging:
     level: <value> # info,debug...
   ```
   Then, pass it to the program using the `--config path/to/config.yaml` argument.
2. Environment variables: by setting `LAKEFS_SGC_<KEY>`, with uppercase letters and `.`s converted to `_`s. \
   For example `logging.level` will be:
   ```bash
   export LAKEFS_SGC_LOGGING_LEVEL=info`
   ```

Example (minimalistic) config file:
```yaml
logging:
  level: debug
lakefs:
  endpoint_url: https://your.url/api/v1
  access_key_id: <your lakeFS access key>
  secret_access_key: <your lakeFS secret key>
```

### Command line reference

#### Flags:
- `-c, --config`: config file to use (default is $HOME/.lakefs-sgc.yaml)

#### Commands:
**run**

Usage: \
`lakefs-sgc run <repository>`

Flags:
- `--cache-dir`: directory to cache read files and metadataDir (default is $HOME/.lakefs-sgc/data/)
- `--parallelism`: number of parallel downloads for metadataDir (default 10)
- `--presign`: use pre-signed URLs when downloading/uploading data (recommended) (default true)

> ### Example run commands

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How to Run Standalone GC 
### Run Commands 
```

Author: Done

-e AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY="$(grep 'aws_secret_access_key' ~/.aws/credentials | awk -F' = ' '{print $2}')" \
-e LAKEFS_SGC_LAKEFS_ENDPOINT_URL=<your lakefs URL> \
-e LAKEFS_SGC_LAKEFS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<your lakefs accesss key> \
-e LAKEFS_SGC_LAKEFS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<your lakefs secret key> \
-e LAKEFS_SGC_LOGGING_LEVEL=debug \
treeverse/lakefs-sgc:<tag> run <repository>
```

#### Mounting the `~/.aws` directory

When working with S3-compatible clients, it's often more convenient to mount the ~/.aws` file and pass in the desired profile.

First, change the permissions for `~/.aws/*` to allow the docker container to read this directory:
```bash
chmod 644 ~/.aws/*
```

Then, run the docker image and mount `~/.aws` to the `lakefs-sgc` home directory on the docker container:
```bash
docker run \
--network=host \
-v ~/.aws:/home/lakefs-sgc/.aws \
-e AWS_REGION=us-east-1 \
-e AWS_PROFILE=<your profile> \
-e LAKEFS_SGC_LAKEFS_ENDPOINT_URL=<your endpoint URL> \
-e LAKEFS_SGC_LAKEFS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<your lakefs accesss key> \
-e LAKEFS_SGC_LAKEFS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<your lakefs secret key> \
-e LAKEFS_SGC_LOGGING_LEVEL=debug \
treeverse/lakefs-sgc:<tag> run <repository>
```

> ### Output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Get the List of Objects Marked for Deletion

The output of an SGC job includes the list of objects marked for deletion. it is located at... 
```

Author: Done

`lakefs-sgc` will write its reports to `<REPOSITORY_STORAGE_NAMESPACE>/_lakefs/retention/gc/reports/<RUN_ID>/`. \
_RUN_ID_ is generated during runtime by the Standalone GC. You can find it in the logs:
```
"Marking objects for deletion" ... run_id=gcoca17haabs73f2gtq0
```

In this prefix, you'll find 2 objects:

> - `deleted.csv` - Containing all marked objects in a CSV containing one `address` column. Example:

Reviewer: Not a docs question, but why this file called deleted if it contains objects that are marked for deletion?

Author: It's aligned with the GC's output
(cc @itaiad200 @Jonathan-Rosenberg - right?)

   ```csv
   address
   "data/gcnobu7n2efc74lfa5ug/csfnri7n2efc74lfa69g,_e7P9j-1ahTXtofw7tWwJUIhTfL0rEs_dvBrClzc_QE"
   "data/gcnobu7n2efc74lfa5ug/csfnri7n2efc74lfa78g,mKZnS-5YbLzmK0pKsGGimdxxBlt8QZzCyw1QeQrFvFE"
   ...
   ```
- `summary.json` - A small json summarizing the GC run. Example:
   ```json
   {
       "run_id": "gcoca17haabs73f2gtq0",
       "success": true,
       "first_slice": "gcss5tpsrurs73cqi6e0",
       "start_time": "2024-10-27T13:19:26.890099059Z",
       "cutoff_time": "2024-10-27T07:19:26.890099059Z",
       "num_deleted_objects": 33000
   }
   ```

> ### Deleting marked objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Delete marked objects
```

Author: Done

## Usage

### Permissions
To run `lakefs-sgc`, you'll need AWS and LakeFS users, with the following permissions:
#### AWS
The minimal required permissions on AWS are:
```json
{
  "Version": "2012-10-17",
  "Statement": [
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Action": [
        "s3:PutObject",
        "s3:GetObject"
      ],
      "Resource": [

>         "arn:aws:s3:::<bucket>/*"

Reviewer 2: Too permesive. Should be this, no?
```suggestion
        "arn:aws:s3:::<storage_namespace>/_lakefs/*"
```

Author: Can't use only `_lakefs` as it needs access to the `_data` prefix as well.
But you're right that it doesn't need permissions for the entire bucket, only the storage namespace prefix.
Changed accordingly.

-e AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID="$(grep 'aws_access_key_id' ~/.aws/credentials | awk -F' = ' '{print $2}')" \
-e AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY="$(grep 'aws_secret_access_key' ~/.aws/credentials | awk -F' = ' '{print $2}')" \

> -e LAKEFS_SGC_LAKEFS_ENDPOINT_URL=<your lakefs URL> \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-e LAKEFS_SGC_LAKEFS_ENDPOINT_URL=<lakeFS Endpoint URL> \
```

> -e LAKEFS_SGC_LAKEFS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<your lakefs accesss key> \
> -e LAKEFS_SGC_LAKEFS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<your lakefs secret key> \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-e LAKEFS_SGC_LAKEFS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<lakeFS accesss key> \
-e LAKEFS_SGC_LAKEFS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<lakeFS secret key> \
```

> -e LAKEFS_SGC_LAKEFS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<your lakefs secret key> \

Reviewer 2: Did we mention somewhere which lakeFS user this user is?
If I'm a customer who want to use that, I'd wish to give it the minimal permissions possible

-e LAKEFS_SGC_LOGGING_LEVEL=debug \
treeverse/lakefs-sgc:<tag> run <repository>
```

#### Mounting the `~/.aws` directory

When working with S3-compatible clients, it's often more convenient to mount the ~/.aws` file and pass in the desired profile.

First, change the permissions for `~/.aws/*` to allow the docker container to read this directory:
```bash
chmod 644 ~/.aws/*
```

Then, run the docker image and mount `~/.aws` to the `lakefs-sgc` home directory on the docker container:
```bash
docker run \
--network=host \
-v ~/.aws:/home/lakefs-sgc/.aws \
-e AWS_REGION=us-east-1 \

> -e AWS_PROFILE=<your profile> \

Reviewer 2: Nit; Here and elsewhere, drop the `your` prefix

Author: Done

```
### Output
`lakefs-sgc` will write its reports to `<REPOSITORY_STORAGE_NAMESPACE>/_lakefs/retention/gc/reports/<RUN_ID>/`. \
_RUN_ID_ is generated during runtime by the Standalone GC. You can find it in the logs:
```
"Marking objects for deletion" ... run_id=gcoca17haabs73f2gtq0
```

In this prefix, you'll find 2 objects:
- `deleted.csv` - Containing all marked objects in a CSV containing one `address` column. Example:
   ```csv
   address
   "data/gcnobu7n2efc74lfa5ug/csfnri7n2efc74lfa69g,_e7P9j-1ahTXtofw7tWwJUIhTfL0rEs_dvBrClzc_QE"
   "data/gcnobu7n2efc74lfa5ug/csfnri7n2efc74lfa78g,mKZnS-5YbLzmK0pKsGGimdxxBlt8QZzCyw1QeQrFvFE"
   ...
   ```
- `summary.json` - A small json summarizing the GC run. Example:
   ```json
   {
       "run_id": "gcoca17haabs73f2gtq0",
       "success": true,
       "first_slice": "gcss5tpsrurs73cqi6e0",
       "start_time": "2024-10-27T13:19:26.890099059Z",
       "cutoff_time": "2024-10-27T07:19:26.890099059Z",
       "num_deleted_objects": 33000
   }
   ```

### Deleting marked objects

To delete the objects marked by the GC, you'll need to read the `deleted.csv` file, and manually delete each address from AWS.

> Example bash command to move all the marked objects to a different bucket on S3:

Reviewer 2: I would add a note about playing it safe and moving the objects instead of deleting them

Author: Done
